Act IScene 1GONZALO: Of course, we're only straws tossed on the ragingsea ... but all's not lost, gentlemen. We just have to tryto get to the eye of the storm.ANTONIO: We might have known this old fool would nag usto death!SEBASTIAN: To the bitter end!GONZALO: Try to understand what I'm telling you: imaginea huge cylinder like the chimney of a lamp, fast as agalloping horse, but in the center as still and unmovingas Cyclops' eye. That's what we're talking about whenwe say "the eye of the storm" and that's where wehave to get.ANTONIO: Oh, great! Do you really mean that the cyclone orCyclops, if he can't see the beam in his own eye, will letus escape! Oh, that's very illuminating!GONZALO: It's a clever way of putting it, at any rate.Literally false, but yet quite true. But what's the fussgoing on up there? The captain seems worried.(Calling) Captain!CAPROSPERO: Boatswain!BOATSWAIN: Aye, sir!CAPROSPERO: We're coming 'round windward of the island.At this speed we'll run·aground. We've got to turn heraround. Heave to! (Exits)BOATSWAIN: Come on, men! Heave to! To the topsail: manthe ropes. Pull! Heave ho, heave ho!ALONSO (Approaching): Well, Boatswain, how are thingsgoing? Where are we?BOATSWAIN: If you ask me, you'd all be better off below, inyour cabins.ANTONIO: He doesn't seem too happy. We'd better ask thecaptain. Where's the captain, Boatswain? He was herejust a moment ago, and now he's gone off.BOATSWAIN: Get back below where you belong! We've gotwork to do!GONZALO: My dear fellow, I can quite understand yourbeing nervous, but a man should be able to controlhimself in any situation, even the most upsetting.BOATSWAIN: Shove it! If you want to save your skins, you'dbetter get yourselves back down below to those firstclasscabins of yours.GONZALO: Now, now, my good fellow, you don't seem toknow to whom you're speaking. (Making introductions)The king's brother, the king's son and myself, theking's counselor.BOATSWAIN: King! King! Well, there's someone who doesn'tgive a fuck more about the king than he does aboutyou or me, and he's called the Gale. His Majesty theGale! And right now, he's in control and we're all hissubjects.GONZALO: He might just as well be pilot on the ferry tohell ... his mouth's foul enough!ANTONIO: In a sense, the fellow regales me, as you might say.We'll pull through, you'll see, because he looks to memore like someone who'll end up on the gallows, notbeneath the billo􀎤s.SEBASTIAN: The end result is the same. The fish will get usand the crows will get him.GONZALO: He did irritate me, rather. However, I take theattenuating circumstances into account ... and, youmust admit, he lacks neither courage nor wit.BOATSWAIN (Returning): Pull in the stud sails. Helmsman,into the wind! Into the wind!(Noticing Sebastian, Antonio, Gonzalo) You again! Ifyou keep bothering us and don't get below and say yourprayers I'll give up and let you sail the ship! You can'texpect me to be the go-between for your souls andBeelzebub!ANTONIO: It's really too much! The fellow is taking advantageof the situation ...BOATSWAIN: Windward! Windward! Heave into the wind!(Thunder, lightning.)SEBASTIAN: Ho! Ho!GONZALO: Did you see that? There, at the top of the masts,in the rigging, that glitter of blue fire, flashing, flashing?They're right when they call these magic lands, sodifferent from our homes in Europe ... Look, even thelightning is different!ANTONIO: Maybe it's a foretaste of the hell that awaits us.GONZALO: You're too pessimistic. Anyway, I've always keptmyself in a state of grace, ready to meet my maker.( Enter sailors.)--SAILORS: Shit! We're sinking!(The passengers can be heard singing "Nearei􀃇 My God, toThee.")BOATSWAIN: To leeward! To leeward!FERDINAND (Entering): Alas! There's no one in hell . . . allthe devils are here!(The ship sinks.)SCENE 2MIRANDA: Oh God! Oh God! A sinking ship! Father, help!(Enter Prospero, hurriedly carrying a megaphone.)PROSPERO: Come, Daughter, calm yourself! It's only a play.There's really nothing wrong. Anyway, everything thathappens is for our own good. Trust me, I won't say anymore.MIRANDA: But such a fine ship, and so many fine, brave livessunk, drowned, laid waste to wrack and ruin .. . A personwould have to have a heart of stone not to bemoved ...PROSPERO: Drowned ... hmmm. That remains to be seen.But draw near, dear princess. The time has come.MIRANDA: You're making fun of me, Father. Wild as I am,you know I am happy-like a queen of the wildflowers,of streams and paths, running barefoot through thornsand flowers, spared by one, caressed by the other.PROSPERO: But you are a princess .. . for how else does oneaddress the daughter of a prince? I cannot leave you inignorance any longer. Milan is the city of your birth,and the city where for many years I was the duke.MIRANDA: Then how did we come here? And tell me, too, bywhat ill fortune did a prince turn into the reclusive hermityou are now, here, on this desert isle? Was itbecause you found the world distasteful, or through theperfidy of some enemy? Is our island a prison or a hermitage?You've hinted at some mystery so many timesand aroused my curiosity, and today you shall tellme all.PROSPERO: In a way, it is because of all the things you mention.First, it is because of political disagreements,because of the intrigues of my ambitious youngerbrother. Antonio is his name, your uncle, and Alonsothe name of the envious King of Naples. How theirambitions were joined, how my brother became theaccomplice of my rival, how the latter promised theformer his protection and my throne . .. the devil aloneknows how all that came about. In any event, when theylearned that through my studies and experiments I hadmanaged to discover the exact location of these landsfor which many had sought for centuries and that I wasmaking preparations to set forth to take possession ofthem, they hatched a scheme to steal my as-yet-unbornempire from me. They bribed my people, they stole mycharts and documents and, to get rid of me, theydenounced me to the Inquisition as a magician and sorcerer.To be brief, one day I saw arriving at the palacemen to whom I had never granted audience: the Priestsof the Holy Office.(Flashback: Standing before Prospero, rvho is 7,TJearing hisducal robes, 1ve see a fi-iar reading fi'om a parchmentscroll.)THE FRIAR: The Holy Inquisition for the preservation andintegrity of the Faith and the pursuit of heretical perversion,acting through the special powers entrusted toit by the Holy Apostolic See, informed of the errorsyou profess, insinuate and publish against God and hisCreation with regard to the shape of the Earth, and thepossibility of discovering other lands, notwithstandingthe fact that the Prophet Isaiah stated and taught thatthe Lord God is seated upon the circle of the Earthand in its center is Jerusalem and that around the worldlies inaccessible Paradise, convinced that it is throughwickedness that to support your heresy you quoteStrabus, Ptolemy and the tragic author Seneca, therebylending credence to the notion that profane writingscan aspire to an authority equal to that of the mostprofound of the Holy Scriptures, given your notorioususe by both night and day of Arabic calculations andscribblings in Hebrew, Syrian and other demonictongues and, lastly, given that you have hithertoescaped punishment owing to your temporal authorityand have, if not usurped, then transformed thatauthority and made it into a tyranny, doth hereby stripyou of your titles, positions and honors in order that itmay then proceed against you according to due processthrough a full and thorough examination, under whichauthority we require that you accompany us,PROSPERO: And yet, the trial they saidthey were going to hold never took place, Such creaturesof darkness are too much afraid of the light,To be brief: instead of killing me they chose-evenworse-to maroon me here with you on this desertisland.MIRANDA: How terrible, and how wicked the world is! Howyou must have suffered!PROSPERO: In all this tale of treason and felony there is butone honorable name: Gonzalo, the counselor to theKing of Naples and fit to serve a better master. Byfurnishing me with food and clothing, by supplying mewith my books and instruments, he has done all in hispower to make my exile in this disgusting place bearable.And now, through a singular turn, Fortune hasbrought to these shores the very men involved in theplot against me. My prophetic science had of coursealready informed me that they would not be contentmerely with seizing my lands in Europe and that theirgreed would win out over their cowardice, that theywould confront the sea and set out for those lands mygenius had discovered. I couldn't let them get awaywith that, and since I was able to stop them, I did so,with the help of Ariel. We brewed up the storm youhave just witnessed, thereby saving my possessionsoverseas and bringing the scoundrels into my powerat the same time.(Enter Ariel. )Well, Ariel?ARIEL Mission accomplished.PROSPERO: Bravo; good work! But what seems to be thematter? I give you a compliment and you don't seempleased? Are you tired?ARIEL: Not tired; disgusted. I obeyed you but-well, whynot come out with it? I did so most unwillingly. It was areal pity to see that great ship go down, so full of life.PROSPERO: Oh, so you're upset, are you! It's always like thatwith you intellectuals! Who cares! W hat interests me isnot your moods, but your deeds. Let's split: I'll take thezeal and you can keep your doubts. Agreed?ARIEL Master, I must beg you to spare me this kind of labor.PROSPERO: Listen, and listen good! T here's atask to be performed, and I don't care how it gets done!ARIEL: You've promised me my freedom a thousand times,and I'm still waiting.PROSPERO: Ingrate! And who freed you from Sycorax, mayI ask? W ho rent the pine in which you had been imprisonedand brought you forth?ARIEL: Sometimes I almost regret it . . . After all, I mighthave turned into a real tree in the end . . . Tree: that'sa word that really gives me a thrill! It often springsto mind: palm tree-springing into the sky like afountain ending in nonchalant, squid-like elegance.The baobab-twisted like the soft entrails of somemonster. Ask the calao bird that lives a cloisteredseason in its branches. Or the ceiba tree-spread outbeneath the proud sun. 0 bird, 0 green mansionsset in the living earth!PROSPERO: Stuff it! I don't like talking trees. As for yourfreedom, you'll have it when I'm good and ready. In themeanwhile, see to the ship. I'm going to have a few wordswith Master Caliban. I've been keeping my eye on him,and he's getting a little too emancipated. (Exit Ariel)(Calling) Caliban! Caliban! (He sighs)(Enter Caliban.)CALIBAN: Uhuru!PROSPERO: What did you say?CALIBAN : I said, Uhuru!PROSPERO: Mumbling'. your native language again! I'vealready told you, I don't like it. You could be polite, atleast; a simple "hello" wouldn't kill you .CALIBAN: Oh, I forgot . . . But make that as froggy, waspish,pustular and a dung-filled "hello" as possible. Maytoday hasten by a decade the day when all the birds ofthe sky and beasts of the earth will feast upon yourcorpse!PROSPERO: Gracious as always, you ugly ape! How can anyonebe so ugly?CALIBAN : You think I'm ugly . . . well, I don't think you'reso handsome yourself. With that big hooked nose, youlook just like some old vulture. ( Laughing) An oldvulture with a scrawny neck!PROSPERO: Since you're so fond of invective, you could atleast thank me for having taught you to speak at all. You,a savage . . . a dumb animal, a beast I educated, trained,dragged up from the bestiality that still clings to you.CALIBAN : In the first place, that's not true. You didn't teachme a thing! Except to jabber in your own language sothat I could understand your orders: chop the wood,wash the dishes, fish for food, plant vegetables, allbecause you're too lazy to do it yourself. And as foryour learning, did you ever impart any of tha t to me?No, you took care not to. All your science you keep foryourself alone, shut up in those big books.PROSPERO: What would you be without me?CALIBAN: Without you? I'd be the king, that's what I'd be,the King of the Island. The King of the Island givenme by my mother, Sycorax.PROSPERO: There are some family trees it's better not toclimb! She's a ghoul! A witch from whom-and mayGod be praised-death has delivered us.CALIBAN : Dead or alive, she'.was my mother, and I won'tdeny her! Anyhow, you only think she's dead becauseyou think the earth itself is dead . . . It's so muchsimpler that way! Dead, you can walk on it, pollute it,you can tread upon it with the steps of a conqueror.I respect the earth, because I know that Sycoraxis alive.Sycorax. Mother.Serpent, rain, lightning.And I see thee everywhere!In the eye of the stagnant pool which stares back atme,through the rushes,in the gesture made by twisted root and its awaitingthrust.In the night, the all-seeing blinded night,the nostril-less all-smelling night!. . . Often, in my dreams, she speaks to me and warnsme . . . Yesterday, even, when I was lying by the streamon my belly lapping at the muddy water, when theBeast was about to spring upon me with that hugestone in his hand . ..PROSPERO: If you keep on like that even your magic won'tsave you from punishment!CALIBAN : That's right, that's right! In the beginning, thegentleman was all sweet talk: dear Caliban here, my littleCaliban there! And what do you think you'd havedone without me in this strange land? Ingrate! I taught-you the trees, fruits, birds, the seasons, and now youdon't give a damn . . . Caliban the animal, Caliban theslave! I know that story! Once you've squeezed the juicefrom the orange, you toss the rind away!PROSPERO: Oh!CALIBAN : Do I lie? Isn't it true that you threw me out ofyour house and made me live in a filthy cave. The ghetto!PROSPERO: It's easy to say "ghetto"! It wouldn't be such aghetto if you took the trouble to keep it clean! Andthere's something you forgot, which is that what forcedme to get rid of you was your lust. Good God, youtried to rape my daughter!CALIBAN : Rape! Rape! Listen, you old goat, you're the onethat put those dirty thoughts in my head. Let me tellyou something: I couldn't care less about your daughter,or about your cave, for that matter. If I gripe, it'son principle, because I didn't like living with you at all,as a matter of fact. Your feet stink!PROSPERO: I did not summon you here to argue. Out! Backto work! Wood, water, and lots of both! I'm expectingcompany today.CALIBAN : I've had just about enough. T here's already a pileof wood that high . . .PROSPERO: Enough! Careful, Caliban! If you keep grumblingyou'll be whipped. And if you don't step lively, ifyou keep dragging your feet or try to strike or sabotagethings, I'll beat you. Beating is the only language youreally understand. So much the worse for you: I'llspeak it, loud and clear. Get a move on!CALIBAN : All right, I'm going . . . but this is the last time.It's the last time, do you hear me? Oh . . . I forgot. I'vegot something important to tell you.PROSPERO: Important? Well, out with it. CALIBAN: It's this : I've decided I don't want to b e calledCaliban any longer.PROSPERO: What kind of rot is that? I don't understand.CALIBAN: PROSPERO: I'm telling you that from now onI won't answer to the name Caliban.PROSPERO: Where did you get that idea?CALIBAN: Well, because Caliban isn 't my name. It's as simpleas that.PROSPERO: Oh, I suppose it's mine!CALIBAN : It's the name given me by your hatred, and everytime it's spoken it's an insult.PROSPERO: My, aren't we getting sensitive! All right, suggestsomething else . . .I 've got to call you something. Whatwill it be? Cannibal would suit you, but I'm sure youwouldn't like that, would you? Let's see . . . what aboutHannibal? That fits. And why not . .. they all seem tolike historical names.CALIBAN : Call me X. That would be best. Like a man withouta name. Or, to be more precise, a man whose namehas been stolen. You talk about history . . . well, that'shistory, and everyone knows it! Every time you summonme it reminds me of a basic fact, the fact thatyou've stolen everything from me, even my identity !Uhuru! (He exits)( Enter Ariel as a sea-nymph . )PROSPERO: M y dear Ariel, did you see how h e looked at me,that glint in his eye? That's something new. Well, letme tell you, Caliban is the enemy. As for those peopleon the boat, I've changed my mind about them. Givethem a scare, but for God's sake don't touch a hair ontheir heads! You'll answer to me if you do.ARIEL I've suffered too much myself for having made themsuffer not to be pleased at your mercy. You can counton me, Master.PROSPERO: Yes, howeve1; great their crimes, if they repentyou can assure them of my forgiveness. They are menof my race, and of high rank. As for me, at my age onemust rise above disputes and quarrels and think aboutthe future. I have a daughter. Alonso has a son. If theywere to fall in love, I would give my consent. LetFerdinand marry Miranda, and may their marriagebring us harmony and peace. That is my plan. I want itexecuted. As for Caliban, does it matter what the villainplots against me? All the nobility of Italy, Naples andMilan henceforth combined, will protect me. Go!ARIEL Yes, Master. Your orders will be fully carried out.( Exit Prospero.Ariel sings: )Sandy seashore, deep blue sky,surf is rising, sea birds flyhere the lover finds delight,sun at noontime, moon at night.Join hands lovers, join the dance,find contentment, find romance.Sandy seashore, deep blue sky,cares will vanish . . . so can I . ..(Enter Ferdinand. )FERDINAND : What is this music? I t has led me here and nowit stops . . . No, there it is again . . .ARIEL (Singing) :Waters move, the oce􀎥n flows,nothing comes and nothing goes . . .Strange days are upon us . . .Oysters stare through pearly eyesheart-shaped corals gently beatin the crystal undersea . . .Waters move and ocean flowsnothing comes and nothing goes . . .Strange days are upon us . . .FERDINAND : What is this that I see before me? A goddess?A mortal?MIRANDA: I know what I 'm seeing: a flatterer. Young man,your ability to pay compliments in the situation inwhich you find yourself at least proves your courage.Who are you?FERDINAND : As you see, a poor shipwrecked soul.MIRANDA: But one of high degree!FERDINAND : In other surroundings I might be called"Prince," "Son of the King .. ." But, no, I was forgetting. .. not "Prince" but "King," alas . . . "King"because my father has just perished in the shipwreck.MIRANDA : Poor young man! Here, you'll be received withhospitality and we'll support you in your misfortune.FERDINAND: Alas, my father . .. Can it be that I am anunnatural son? Your pity would make the greatest ofsorrows seem sweet.MIRANDA : I hope you'll like it here with us. The island ispretty. I'll show you the beaches and the forests, I'll tellyou the names of the fruits and flowers, I'll introduceyou to a whole world of insects, of lizards of every hue,of birds . . . Oh, you cannot imagine! The birds! . . .(Enter Prospero. )PROSPERO: That's enough, Daughter! I find your chatterirritating . . . and let me assure you, it's not at all fitting.You are doing too much honor to an impostor.Young man, you are a traitor, a spy and a woman-chaserto boot! No sooner has he escaped the perils of the seathan he's sweet-talking the first girl he meets! Youwon't get 'round me that way. Your arrival is convenient,because I need more manpower: you shall be myhouse servant .FERDINAND : Seeing the young lady, more beautiful than anywood-nymph, I might have been Ulysses on Nausicaa'sisle. But hearing you, sir, I now understand my fate alittle better . . . I see I have come ashore on the BarbaryCoast and am in the hands of a cruel pirate. (Drawinghis sword) However, a gentleman prefers death to dishonor!I shall defend my life with my freedom!PROSPERO: your arm is growing weak, your kneesare trembling! Traitor! I could kill you now . . . butI need the manpower. Follow me.ARIEL It's no use trying to resist, young man. My master isa sorcerer: neither your passion nor your youth canprevail against him. Your best course would be to followand obey him.FERDINAND : Oh God! What sorcery is this? Vanquished, acaptive-yet far from rebelling against my fate, I amfinding my servitude sweet. Oh, I would be imprisonedfor life if only heaven:will grant me a glimpse of mysun each day, the face of my own sun . Farewell,Nausicaa.(They exit. )Act IISCENE 1Caliban's cave. Cahban is singing as he works. Ariel enters andlistens to him for a moment.CALIBAN (Singing):May he who eats his corn heedless of Shangobe accursed! May Shango creep beneathhis nails and eat into his flesh!Shango, Shango ho!Forget to give him room if you dare!He will make himself at home on your nose!Refuse to have him under your roof at yourown risk!He'll tear off your roof and wear it as a hat!Whoever tries to mislead Shangowill suffer for it!Shango, Shango ho!ARIEL Greetings, Caliban. I know you don't think much ofme, but after all we are brothers, brothers in sufferingand slavery, but brothers in hope as well. We both wantour freedom. We just have· different methods.CALIBAN: Greetings to you. But you didn't come to see mejust to make that profession of faith. Come on, Alastor!The old man sent you, didn't he? A great job: carryingout the Master's fine ideas, his great plans.ARIEL No, I've come on my own. I came to warn you.Prospero is planning horrible acts of revenge againstyou. I thought it my duty to alert you.CALIBAN: I'm ready for him.ARIEL Poor Caliban, you're doomed. You know that youaren't the stronger, you'll never be the stronger. Whatgood will it do you to struggle?CALIBAN: And what about you? What good has your obediencedone you, your Uncle Tom patience and yoursucking up to him. The man's just getting moredemanding and despotic day by day.ARIEL Well, I've at least achieved one thing: he's promisedme my freedom. In the distant future, of course, butit's the first time he's actually committed himself.CALIBAN: Talk's cheap! He'll promise you a thousand timesand take it back a thousand times. Anyway, tomorrowdoesn't interest me. What I want is (Shouting) FreedomNow!ARIEL Okay. But you know you're not going to get it outof him "now," and that he's stronger than you are. I'min a good position to know just what he's got in hisarsenal.CALIBAN: The stronger? How do you know that? Weaknessalways has a thousand ways and cowardice is all thatkeeps us from listing them.ARIEL I don't believe in violence.CALIBAN: What do you believe in, then? In cowardice? Ingiving up? In kneeling and groveling? That's it, someonestrikes you on the right cheek and you offer theleft. Someone kicks you on the left buttock and youturn the right . . . that way there's no jealousy. Well,that's not Caliban's way . . .ARIEL You know very well that's not what I mean. No violence,no submission either. Listen to me: Prospero isthe one we've got to change. Destroy his serenity sothat he's finally forced to acknowledge his own injusticeand put an end to it.CALIBAN: Oh sure . .. that's a good one! Prospero's conscience!Prospero is an old scoundrel who has no conscience.ARIEL Exactly-that's why it's up to us to give him one. I'mnot fighting just for my freedom, for our freedom, butfor Prospero too, so that Prospero can acquire a conscience.Help me, Caliban.CALIBAN: Listen, kid, sometimes I wonder if you aren't a littlebit nuts. So that Prospero can acquire a conscience?You might as well ask a stone to grow flowers.ARIEL I don't know what to do with you. I've often had thisinspiring, uplifting dream that one day Prospero, you,me, we would all three set out, like brothers, to build awonderful world, each one contributing his own specialthing: patience, vitality, love, willpower too, and rigor,not to mention the dreams without which mankindwould perish.CALIBAN: You don't understand a thing about Prospero.He's not the collaborating type. He's a guy who onlyfeels something when he's wiped someone out.A crusher, a pulverizer, that's what he is! And you talkabout brotherhood!ARIEL So then what's left? War? And you know that when itcomes to that, Prospero is invincible.CALIBAN : Better death than_humiliation and injustice.Anyhow, I'm going to have the last word. Unless nothingnesshas it. The day when I begin to feel that everything'slost, just let me get hold of a few barrels ofyour infernal powder and as you fly around up there inyour blue skies you'll see this island, my inheritance,my work, all blown to smithereens . . . and, I trust,Prospero and me with it. I hope you'll like the fireworksdisplay-it'll be signed Caliban.ARIEL Each of us marches to his own drum. You followyours. I follow the beat of mine. I wish you courage,brother.CALIBAN: Farewell, Ariel, my brother, and good luck.SCENE 2GONZALO: A magnificent country! Bread hangs from thetrees and the apricots are bigger than a woman's fullbreast.SEBASTIAN: A pity that it's so wild and uncultivated . .. hereand there.GONZALO: Oh, that's nothing. If there were anything poisonous,an antidote would never be far away, for natureis intrinsically harmonious. I've even read somewherethat guano is excellent compost for sterile ground.SEBASTIAN: Guano? What kind of animal is that? Are yousure you don't mean iguana?GONZALO: Young man, if I say guano, I mean guano. Guanois the name for bird droppings that build up over centuries, and it is by far the best fertilizer known. You digit out of caves ... if you want my opinion, I think weshould investigate all the caves on this island one byone to see if we:find any, and if we do, this island, ifwisely exploited, will be richer than Egypt with itsNile.ANTONIO: Let me understand: your guano cave contains ariver of dried bird shit.GONZALO: To pick up on your image, all we need to do ischannel that river, use it to irrigate, if I may use theterm, the fields with this wonderful fecal matter, andeverything will bloom.SEBASTIAN: But we'll still need manpower to farm it. Is theisland even inhabited?GONZALO: That's the problem, of course. But if it is, it mustbe by wonderful people. It's obvious: a wondrous landcan only contain wonderful creatures.ANTONIO: Yes!Men whose bodies are wiry and strongand women whose eyes are open and frank . . .. creatures in it!GONZALO: Something like that! I see you know your literature.But in that case, watch out: it will mean newresponsibilities for us!SEBASTIAN: How do you get that?GONZALO: I mean that if the island is inhabited, as I believe,and if we colonize it, as is my hope, then we have totake every precaution not to import our shortcomings,yes, what we call civilization. They must stay as theyare: savages, noble and good savages, free, without anycomplexes or complications. Something like a poolgranting eternal youth where we periodically come torestore our aging, citified souls.ANTONIO: Sir Gonzalo, when will you shut up?GONZALO: Ah, Your Majesty, if I am boring you, I apologize.I was only speaking as I did to distract you and to turnall our sad thoughts to something more pleasant.There, I'll be silent. Indeed, these old bones have hadit. Oof ! Let me sit down . .. with your permission, ofcourse.ALONSO: Noble Old Man, even though younger than you,we are all in the same fix.GONZALO: In other words, dead tired and dying of hunger.ALONSO: I have never pretended to be above the humancondition.(A strange, solemn music is heard.). . . Listen, listen! Did you hear that?GONZALO: Yes, it's an odd melody!(Enter Prospero with Ariel, both invisible. Other strangefigures enter as J1Jelt, bearing a laden table. They dance andgracious􀃀y invite the king and his company to eat, then thecreatures disappear.)ALONSO: Heaven protect us! Live marionettes!GONZALO: Such grace! Such music! Hum. The whole thingis most peculiar.SEBASTIAN: Gone! Faded away! But what does that matter,since they've left their food behind! No meal was evermore welcome. Gentlemen, to table!ALONSO: Yes, let us partake of this feast, even though it maybe our last.(They prepare to eat, but elves enter and, with much grimacingand many contortions, carry off the table.)GONZALO: Ah! That's a fine way to behave!ALONSO: I have the distinct feeling that we have fallen underthe sway of Powers that are playing cat and mouse withus. It's a cruel way to make us aware of our dependentstatus.GONZALO: The way things have been going it's not surprising,and it will do us no good to protest.(The e Ives return, bringing the food with them.)ALONSO: Oh no, this time I won't bite!SEBASTIAN: I'm so hungry that I don't care, I'll abandon myscruples.GONZALO (To Alonso): Why not try? Perhaps the Powerscontrolling us saw how disappointed we were and tookpity on us. After all, even though disappointed a hundredtimes, Tantalus still tried a hundred times.ALONSO: That was also his torture. I won't touch that food.PROSPERO: Ariel, I don't like his refusing. Harassthem until they eat.ARIEL (Invisible): Why should we go to any trouble forthem? If they won't eat, they can die of hunger.PROSPERO: No, I want them to eat.ARIEL That's despotism. A while ago you made me snatch itaway just when they were about to gobble it up, and nowthat they don't want it you are ready to force feed them.PROSPERO: Enough hairsplitting! My mood has changed!They insult me by not eating. They must be made toeat out of my hand like chicks. That is a sign of submissionI insist they give me.ARIEL It's evil to play with their hunger as you do with theiranxieties and their hopes.PROSPERO: That is how power is measured. I am Power.(Alonso and his group eat. )ALONSO: Alas, when I think . . .GONZALO: That's your trouble, sire: you think too much.ALONSO: And thus I should not even think of my lost son!My throne! My country!GONZALO (Eating): Your son! What's to say we won't findhim again! As for the rest of it .. . Look, sire, this filthyhole is now our entire world. Why seek further? If yourthoughts are too vast, cut them down to size.(They eat. )ALONSO: So be it! But I would prefer to sleep. To sleep andto forget.GONZALO: Good idea! Let's put up our hammocks!(They sleep.)SCENE 3Enter Antonio and Sebastian upon the group.ANTONIO: Look at those leeches, those slugs! Wallowing intheir slime and their snot: idiots, slime-they're likebeached jellyfish.SEBASTIAN: Shhh! It's the king. And that old graybeard ishis venerable counselor.ANTONIO: The king is he who watches over his flock whenthey sleep. That one isn't watching over anything.Ergo, he's not the king. (Brusquely) You're a reallybloodless lily-liver if you can see a king asleep withoutgetting certain ideas . ..SEBAST IAN : I mustn't have any blood, only water.ANTONIO: Don't insult water. Every time I look at myselfI think I'm more handsome, more there. My innerjuices have always given me my greatness, my truegreatness . . . not the greatness men grant me.SEBASTIAN: All right, so I'm stagnant water.ANTONIO : Water is never stagnant. It works, it works in us.It is what gives man his dimension, his true one.Believe me, you're mistaken if you don't grab theopportunity when it's offered you. It may never comeagam.SEBASTIAN: What are you getting at? I have a feeling I canguess.ANTONIO: Guess, guess! Look at that tree swaying in thewind, It's called a coconut palm. My dear Sebastian, inmy opinion it's time to shake the coconut palm.SEBASTIAN: Now I really don't understand.ANTON I O : What a dope! Consider my position: I'm Duke ofMilan. Well, I wasn't always . .. I had an older brother.That was Duke Prospero. And if I'm now Duke Antonio,it's because I knew when to shake the coconut palm.SEBASTIAN : And Prospero?ANTONIO : What do you mean by that? When you shake atree, someone is bound to fall. And obviously it wasn'tme who fell, because here I am: to assist and serve you,Majesty!SEBASTIAN : Enou gh! He's my brother! My scruples won'tallow me to . . . You take care of him while I deal withthe old counselor.( They draiv their swords. )ARIEL: Stop, ruffians ! Resistance is futile: your swords areenchanted and falling from your hands!ANTO N I O AND SEBAST IAN : Alas! Alas !ARIEL: Sleepers, awake! Awake, I say! Your life depends onit. With these fine fellows with their long teeth andswords around, anyone who sleeps too soundly riskssleeping forever.( Alonso and Gonzalo awaken.)ALONS O (Rubbing his eyes) : What's happening? I was asleep,and I was having a terrible dream!ARIEL: No, you were not dreaming. These fine lords here arecriminals who were about to perpetrate the most odiousof crimes upon you. Yes, Alonso, you may well marvelthat a god should fly to your aid. Were to heaven youdeserved it more!ALO NSO : I have never been wanting in respect for thedivinity . . .ARIEL: I don't know what effect my next piece of news willhave on you: the name of him who has sent me to youis Prospero.ALO NSO : Prospero! God save us! (Falls to his knees)ARIEL: I understand your feelings. He lives. It is he who reignsover this isle, as he reigns over the spirits of the air youbreathe . . . But rise . . . you need fear no longer. He hasnot saved your lives to destroy them. Your repentancewill suffice, for I can see that it is deep and sincere. (ToAntonio and Sebastian) As for you, gentlemen, my master'spardon extends to you as well, on the condition thatyou renounce your plans, knowing them to be in vain.SEBAST IAN (To Antonio) : We could have got worse!ANTONIO : If it were men we were up against, no one couldmake me withdraw, but when it's demons and magicthere's no shame in giving in. (To Ariel) .. . We are theduke's most humble and obedient servants. Please beghim to accept our thanks.GONZALO : Oh, how ignoble! How good of you to just wipethe slate clean! No surface repentance . . .n ot only doyou want attrition, you want contrition as well! Whylook at me as though you didn't know what I was talkingabout? Attrition: a selfish regret for offending God,caused by a fear of punishment. Contritio n : an unselfishregret growing out of sorrow at displeasing God.ARIEL: Honest Gonzalo, thank you for your clarification.Your eloquence has eased my mission and your pedagogicalskill has abbreviated it, for in a few short wordsyou have expressed my master's thought. May yourwords be heard! Therefore, let us turn the page. To terminatethis episode, I need only convoke you all, on mymaster's behalf, to the celebrations that this very daywill mark the engagement of his daughter, Miranda.Alonso, that's good news for you ...ALONSO : What-my son?ARIEL: Correct. Saved by my master from the fury of thewaves.ALONSO (Falling to his knees) : God be praised for this blessingmore than all the rest. Rank, fortune, throne, I amprepared to forgo all if my son is returned to me . . .ARIEL: Come, gentlemen, follow me.Act IIISCENE 1FERDINAND (Hoeing and singing):How life has changednow, hoe in handI work away all day ...Hoeing all the day,I go my weary way ...CALIBAN: Poor kid! What would he say if he was Caliban!He works night and day, and when he sings, it's:Oo-en-day, Oo-en-day, Oo-en-day, Macaya ...And no pretty girl to console him! (Sees Mirandaapproaching) Aha! Let's listen to this!FERDINAND (Singing):How my life has changednow, hoe in handI work away all day ...(Enter Miranda.)MIRANDA: Poor young man! Can I help you? You don't looklike you were cut out for this kind of work!FERDINAND: One word from you would be more help to methan anything in the world.MIRANDA: One word? From me? I must say, I ...FERDINAND: Your name-that's all: what is your name?MIRANDA: That, I cannot say! It's impossible. My father hasexpressly forbidden it!FERDINAND: It is the only thing I long for.MIRANDA: But I can't, I tell you; it's forbidden!CALIBAN (Taking advantage of Miranda's momentary distraction,he whispers her name to Ferdinand): Mi-ran-da!FERDINAND: All right then, I shall christen you with a nameof my own. I will call you Miranda.MIRANDA: That's too much! What a low trick! You musthave heard my father calling me ... Unless it was thatawful Caliban who keeps pursuing me and calling outmy name in his stupid dreams!FERDINAND: No, Miranda ... I had only to allow my eyes tospeak, as you your face.MIRANDA: Sssh! My father's coming! He'd better not catchyou trying to sweet talk me .. .FERDINAND (Goes back to work, singing):But times have changednow, hoeing all the day,I go my weary way ...PROSPERO: That's fine, young man! You've managed toaccomplish a good deal for a beginning! I see I've misjudgedyou. But you won't be the loser if you serve mewell. Listen, my young friend, there are three things inlife: Work, Patience, Continence, and the world is yours... Hey, Caliban, I'm taking this boy away with me.He's done enough for one day. But since the job isurgent, see that it gets finished.CALIBAN: Me?PROSPERO: Yes, you! You've cheated me enough with yourloafing and fiddling around, so you can work a doubleshift for once!CALIBAN: I don't see why I should do someone else's job!PROSPERO:if you don't like work, I'll see to it you changeyour mind!( Prospero and Ferdinand move away.)CALIBAN: Go on, go on ... I'll get you one day, you bastard!(He sets to work, singing:)Oo-en-day, Oo-en-day, Oo-en-day, Macaya ...Shit, now it's raining! As if things weren't bad enough... (Suddenly, at the sound of a voice, Caliban stiffens)Do you hear that, boy? That voice through the storm.Bah! It's Ariel. No, that's not his voice. Whose, then?With an old coot like Prospero ... One of his cops,probably. Oh, fine! Now, I'm for it. Men and the elementsboth against me. Well, the hell with it ... I'mused to it. Patience! I'll get them yet. In the meantimebetter make myself scarce! Let Prospero and his stormand his cops go by ... let the seven maws ofMalediction bay!Enter Trinculo.TRINCULO (Singing):SCENE 2Oh, Susannah ... oh don't you cry for me ... (Etc.)You can say that again! My dearest Susannah ... trustTrinculo, we've had all the roaring storms we need, andmore! I swear: the whole crew wiped out, liquidated ...Nothing! Nothing left! . . . Nothing but poor wanderingand wailing Trinculo! No question about it, it'll bea while before anyone persuades me to depart fromaffectionate women and friendly towns to go off tobrave roaring storms! How it's raining! (Notices Calibanunderneath the 1vheelbarrorv) Ah, an Indian! Dead oralive? You never know with these tricky races. Yukkk!Anyhow, this will do me fine. If he's dead, I can use hisclothes for shelter, for a coat, a tent, a covering. If he'salive I'll make him my prisoner and take him back toEurope and then, by golly, my fortune will be made! I'llsell him to a carnival. No! I'll show him myself at fairs!What a stroke of luck! I'll just settle in here where it'swarm and let the storm rage!(He crawls under cover, back to back with Caliban.Enter Stephano.)SEBASTIAN:Blow the man down, hearties,blow the man down ... (Etc.)(Takes a swig of his bottle and continues:)Blow, blow, blow the man down ... (Etc.)Fortunately, there's still a little wine left in this bottle ...enough to give me courage! Be of good cheer,Stephano, where there's life there's thirst ... and viceversa! ( Suddenly spies Caliban's head sticking out of thecovers) My God, on Stephano's word, it looks like aNindian! (Comes nearer) And that's just what it is! ANindian. That's neat. I really am lucky. There's moneyto be made from a Nindian like that. If you showedhim at a carnival ... along with the bearded lady andthe flea circus, a real Nindian! An authentic Nindianfrom the Caribbean! That means real dough, or I'm thelast of the idiots! (Touching Caliban) But he's ice cold!I don't know what the body temperature of a Nindianis, but this one seems pretty cold to me! Let's hope he'snot going to croak! How's that for bad luck: you find aNindian and he dies on you! A fortune slips throughyour fingers! But wait, I've got an idea . .. a good swigof this booze between his lips, that'll warm him up.(He gives Caliban a drink) Look ... he's better already.The little glutton even wants some more! Just a second,just a second! (He walks around the 1))/ieelbarrom and seesTrinculo 's head sticking out from under the covering) Jeez!I must be seeing things! A Nindian with two heads!Shit! If I have to pour drink down tllJo gullets I won'thave much left for myself! Well, never mind. It'sincredible ... your everyday Nindian is already something,but one with two heads ... a Siamese-twinNindian, a Nindian with two heads and eight paws,that's really something! My fortune is made. Come on,you wonderful monster, you ... let's get a look at yourother head! (He dral))s nearer to Trinculo) Hello! Thatface reminds me of something! That nose that shineslike a lighthouse .. .TRINCULO: That gut .. .SEBASTIAN: That nose looks familiar ...TRINCULO: That gut-there can't be two of them in thislousy world!SEBASTIAN: Oh-my-gawd, oh-my-gawd, oh-my-gawd ...that's it ... it's that crook Trinculo!TRINCULO: Good lord! It's Stephano!SEBASTIAN: So, Trinculo, you were saved too ... It almostmakes you believe God looks after drunks ..TRINCULO: Huh! God .. . Bacchus, maybe. As a matter offact, I reached these welcoming shores by floating on abarrel .. .SEBASTIAN: And I by floating on my stomach . .. it's nearlythe same thing. But what kind of creature is this? Isn'tit a Nindian?TRINCULO: That's just what I was thinking ... Yes, by God, it'sa Nindian. That's a piece of luck ... he'll be our guide.SEBASTIAN: Judging from the way he can swill it down, hedoesn't seem to be stupid. I'll try to civilize him. Oh ...not too much, of course. But enough so that he can beof some use.TRINCULO: Civilize him! Shee-it! Does he even know how totalk?SEBASTIAN: I couldn't get a word out of him, but I know away to loosen his tongue. (He takes a bottlefi'om his pocket)TRINCULO (Stopping him): Look here, you're not going towaste that nectar on the first savage that comes along,are you?SEBASTIAN: Selfish! Back off! Let me perform my civilizingmission. (Offering the bottle to Caliban) Of course, ifhe was cleaned up a bit he'd be worth more to both ofus. Okay? We'll exploit him together? It's a deal? ( ToCaliban) Drink up, pal. You. Drink .. . Yum-yum bottybotty! (Caliban drinks) You, drink more. (Caliban refuses)You no more thirsty? (Stephano drinks) Me alwaysthirsty! (Stephano and Trinculo drink) Trinculo, youknow I used to be prejudiced against shipwrecks, butI was wrong. They're not bad at all.TRINCULO: That's true. It seems to make things taste betterafterwards ...SEBASTIAN: Not to mention the fact that it's got rid of a lotof old farts that were always keeping the world down!May they rest in peace! But then, you liked them, didn'tyou, all those kings and dukes, all those noblemen! Oh,I served them well enough, you've got to earn yourdrink somehow ... But I could never stand them,ever-understand? Never. Trinculo, my friend, I'm along-time believer in the republic ... you might as wellsay it: I'm a died-in-the-wool believer in the peoplefirst, a republican in my guts! Down with tyrants!TRINCULO : Which reminds me .. . If, as it would seem, theking and the duke are dead, there's a crown and athrone up for grabs around here .. .STE PROSPERO:right! Smart thinking, Trinculo!So, I appoint myself heir .. . I crown myself King ofthe Island.TRINCULO (Sarcastically) : Sure you do! And why you, mayI ask? I'm the one who thought of it first, that crown!S T EPROSPERO:just take a look at yourself! What's the first thing a kingneeds? Bearing. Presence. And if I've got anything, it'sthat. Which isn't true for everyone. So, I am the king!CALIBAN : Long live the king!SEBASTIAN: It's a miracle . .. he can talk! And what's more,he talks sense! 0 brave savage! (He embraces Caliban)You see, me dear Trinculo, the people has spoken! Voxpopuli, vox Dei . .. But please, don't be upset.Stephano is magnanimous and will never abandon hisfriend Trinculo, the friend who stood by him in his trials.Trinculo, we've eaten rough bread together, we'vedrunk rot-gut wine together. I want to do somethingfor you. I shall appoint you marshal. But we're forgettingour brave savage ... It's a scientific miracle! Hecan talk!CALIBAN : Yes, sire. My enthusiasm has restored my speech .Long live the king! But beware the usurper!ST E PROSPERO: Usurper? Who? Trinculo?CALIBANo, the other one . .. Prospero!SEBASTIAN: Prospero? Don't know him .CALIBAN : Well, you see, this island used to belong to me,except that a man named Prospero cheated me of it.I'm perfectly willing to give you my right to it, but theonly thing is, you'll have to fight Prospero for it.PROSPERO: That is of no matter, brave savage. It's a bargain!I'll get rid of this Prospero in two shakes.CALIBAN: Watch out, he's powerful.S TEPROSPERO: My dear savage, I eat a dozen Prosperos like thatfor breakfast every day. But say no more, say no more!Trinculo, take command of the troops! Let us marchupon the foe!TRINCU LO : Yes, forward march ! But first, a drink. We willneed all our strength and vigor.CALIBAN: Let's drink, my new-found friends, and let us sing.Let us sing of winning the day and of an end to tyranny.(Singing: )Black pecking creature of the savannasthe quetzal measures out the new daysolid and livelyin its haughty armor.Zing! the determined hummingbirdrevels in the flower's depths,going crazy, getting drunk,a lyrebird gathers up our ravings.Freedom hi-day! Freedom hi-day!S T E PROSPERO: Freedom hi-day! Freedom hi-day!CALIBAN (Singing) :The ringdove dallies amid the trees,wandering the islands, here it restsThewhite blossoms of the miconiamingle with the violet blood of the ripe berriesand blood stains your plumage,traveler!Lying here after a weary daywe listen to it:Freedom hi-day! Freedom hi-day!S T E PROSPERO: Okay, monster ... enough crooning. Singingmakes a man thirsty. Let's drink instead. Here, havesome more . . .sp irits create higher spirits ... (Fillinga glass) Lead the way, 0 bountiful wine! Soldiers,forward march! Or rather . . .n o: at ease! Night isfalling, the fireflies twinkle, the crickets chirp, allnature makes its brek-ke-ke-kek! And since night hasfallen, let us take advantage of it to gather our forcesand regain our strength, which has been sorely triedby the unusually ... copious emotions of the day. Andtomorrow, at dawn, with a new spring in our step, we'llhave the tyrant's hide. Good night, gentlemen.( He falls asleep and begins to snore. )S CALIBAN E 3Prospero 's cave.PROSPERO: So then, Ariel! Where are the gods and goddesses?They'd better get a move on! And all of them! I wantall of them to take part in the entertainment I haveplanned for our dear children. Why do I say "entertainment"? Because starting today I want to inculcate inthem the spectacle of tomorrow's world: logic, beauty,harmony, the foundations for which I have laid downby my own willpower. Unfortunately, alas, at my age,it's time to stop thinking of deeds and to begin thinkingof passing on ... Enter, then!(Gods and Goddesses enter. )JUNO: Honor and riches to you! Long continuance andincreasing long life and honored issue! Juno sings toyou her blessings!CERES : May scarcity and want shun you! That is Ceres'blessing on you.IRIS (Beckoning to the Nymphs) : Nymphs, come help to celebratehere a contract of true love.(Nymphs enter and dance. )PROSPERO: My thanks, Goddesses, and my thanks to you,Iris. Thank you for your good wishes.(Gods and Goddesses continue their dance. )FERDINAND : What a splendid and majestic vision! May I beso bold to think these spirits?PROSPERO: Yes, spirits which by my art I have from theirconfines called to greet you and to bless you.(Enter Eshu. )MIRANDA : But who is that? He doesn't look very benevolent!If I weren't afraid of blaspheming, I'd say he was adevil rather than a god.E HU (Laughing) : You are not mistaken, fair lady. God to myfriends, the Devil to my enemies! And lots of laughsfor all!PROSPERO: Ariel must have made a mistake. Is mymagic getting rusty? (Aloud) What are you doing here?Who invited you? I don't like such loose behavior, evenfrom a god!ESHU: But that's just the point . .. no one invited me ...And that wasn't very nice! Nobody remembered poorEshu! So poor Eshu came anyway. Hihihi! So howabout something to drink? (Without waiting for a reply,he pours a drink) ... Your liquor's not bad. However,I must say I prefer dogs! (Looking at Iris) I see thatshocks the little lady, but to each his own. Some preferchickens, others prefer goats. I'm not too fond ofchickens, myself But if you're talking about a blackdog . .. think of poor Eshu!PROSPERO: Get out! Go away! We will have none of yourgrimaces and buffoonery in this noble assembly. (Hemakes a magic sign)ESHU: I'm going, boss, I'm going . . . But not without a littlesong in honor of the bride and the noble company, asyou say. (Singing: )Eshu can play many tricks,give him twenty dogs!You will see his dirty tricks.Eshu plays a trick on the queenand makes her so upset that she runsnaked into the street.Eshu plays a trick on a bride,and on the day of the weddingshe gets into the wrong bed!Eshu can throw a stone yesterdayand kill a bird today.He can make a mess out of order and vice-versa.Ah, Eshu is a wonderful bad joke.Eshu is not the man to carry a heavy load.His head comes to a point. When he danceshe doesn't move his shoulders .. .Oh, Eshu is a merry elf!Eshu is a merry elf,and he can whip you with his dick,he can whip you,he can whip you ...CERES: My dear Iris, don't you find that song quite obscene?JUNO: It's disgusting! It's quite intolerable . .. if he keepson, I'm leaving!IRIS: It's like Liber, or Priapus!JUNO: Don't mention that name in my presence!ESHU (Continuing to sing):.. . with his dickhe can whip you, whip you . ..JUNO: Oh! Can't someone get rid of him? I'm not stayinghere!ESHU: Okay, okay . .. Eshu will go. Farewell, my dear colleagues!(Exits)(Gods and Goddesses exit.)PROSPERO: He's gone . .. what a relief! But alas, the harm isdone! I am perturbed .. . My old brain is confused .Power! Power! Alas ! All this will one day fade, likefoam, like a cloud, like all the world. And what ispower, if I cannot calm my own fears? But come! Mypower has gone cold.· (Ca,/l£ng) Ariel!A RI E L (Runs in) : What is it, sire?PROSPERO: Caliban is alive, he is plotting, he is getting aguerrilla force together and you-you don't say a word!Well, take care of him. Snakes, scorpions, porcupines,all stinging poisonous creatures, he is to be sparednothing! His punishment must be exemplary. Oh, anddon't forget the mud and mosquitoes!ARIEL: Master, let me intercede for him and beg your indulgence.You've got to understand: he's a rebel.PROSPERO: By his insubordination he's calling into questionthe whole order of the world. Maybe the Divinity canafford to let him get away with it, but I have a sense ofresponsibility!ARIEL Very well, Master.PROSPERO: arrange some glass trinkets, sometrumpery and some second-hand clothes too . .. butcolorful ones . .. by the side of the road along whichGeneral Caliban and his troops are traveling. Savagesadore loud, gaudy clothes .. .ARIEL: Master ...PROSPERO: You're going to make me angry. There's nothingto understand. There is a punishment to be meted out.I will not compromise with evil . Hurry! Unless youwant to be the next to feel my wrath.SCENE 4In the wild; night is drawing to a close, the murmurings of thespirits of the tropical forest are heard.VOICE 1: Fly!VOICE 11 : Here!VOI CE 1: Ant!VOICE 11: Here.VOICE 1: Vulture!VOICE 11: Here.VOICE 1: Soft-shelled crab, calao, crab, hummingbird!VOICE 11: Here. Here. Here.VOICE 1: Cramp, crime, fang, opossum!VOICE 11 : Kra. Kra. Kra.VOICE 1: Huge hedgehog, you will be our sun today. Shaggy,taloned, stubborn. May it burn! Moon, my fat spider,my big dreamcat, go to sleep, my velvet one.VOICE 11 (Singing) :King-ayKing-ayVon-vonMalotoVloom-vloom!(The sun rises. Ariel 's band vanishes. Caliban stands for amoment, rubbing his eyes. )CALIBAN (Searching the bushes) : Have to think about gettinggoing again. Away, snakes, scorpions, porcupines! Allstinging, biting, sticking beasts ! Sting, fever, venom,away ! Or if you really want to lick me, do it with a gentletongue, like the toad whose pure drool soothes mewith sweet dreams of the future. For it is for you , forall of us, that I go forth today to face the commonenemy. Yes, hereditary and common. Look, a hedgehog!S weet little thing . . . How can any animal-anynatural animal, if I may put it that way-go against meon the day I'm setting forth to conquer Prospero !Unimaginable! Prospero is the Anti-Nature ! And I say,down with Anti-Nature ! And does the porcupine bristlehis spines at that? No, he smoothes them down!That's nature ! It's kind and gentle, in a word . You'vejust got to know how to deal with it. So come on, theway is clear ! Off we go !( The band sets out. Caliban marches fonvard singing hisbattle song: )Shango carries a b i g stick,he strikes and money expires!He strikes and lies expire !He strikes and larceny expires!Shango, Shangoho!Shango is the gatherer of the rain,he passes, wrapped in his fiery cloak,his horse's hoofs strike lightingon the pavements of the sky!Shango is a great knight!Shango, Shango ho!(The roar of the sea can be heard.Enter Stephano and Trinculo.)SEBASTIAN: Tell me, brave savage, what is that noise? Itsounds like the roaring of a beast at bay.CALIBANot at bay . . . more like on the prowl . . . Don'tworry, it's a pal of mine.SEBASTIAN: You are very close-mouthed about the companyyou keep.CALIBAN: And yet it helps me breathe. That's why I call it apal. Sometimes it sneezes, and a drop falls on my foreheadand cools me with its salt, or blesses me . ..SEBASTIAN: I don't understand. You aren't drunk, are you?CALIBAN : Come on! It's that howling impatient thing thatsuddenly appears in a clap of thunder like some godand hits you in the face, that rises up out of the verydepths of the abyss and smites you with its fury! It'sthe sea!SEBASTIAN: Odd country! And an odd baptism!CALIBAN : But the best is still the wind and the songs it sings. . . its dirty sigh when it rustles through the bushes, orits triumphant chant when it passes by breaking trees,remnants of their terror in its beard.SEBASTIAN: The savage is delirious, he's raving mad! Toughluck, Trinculo, our savage is playing without a full deck!TRINCU LO: I'm kind of shuffling myself ... In other words,I'm exhausted. I never knew such hard going! Savage,even your mud is muddier.CALIBAN : That isn't mud ... it's something Prospero'sdreamed up.TRINCULO : There's a savage for you . . . everything's alwayscaused by someone. The sun is Prospero's smile. Therain is the tear in Prospero's eye . . . And I suppose themud is Prospero's shit. And what about the mosquitoes?What are they, may I ask? Zzzzzz, Zzzzzz . . . doyou hear them? My face is being eaten off!CALIBAN: Those aren't mosquitoes. Its some kind of gas thatstings your nose and throat and makes you itch. It'sanother of Prospero's tricks. It's part of his arsenal .SEBASTIAN: What do you mean by that?CALIBAN: I mean his anti-riot arsenal! He's got a lot of gadgetslike these . .. gadgets to make you deaf, to blindyou, to make you sneeze, to make you cry ...TRI NCULO : And to make you slip! Shit! This is some fixyou 've got us in! I can't take anymore .. . I'm going tosit down!SEBASTIAN: Come on, Trinculo, show a little courage! We'reengaged in a mobile ground maneuver here, and youknow what that means: drive, initiatives, split-seconddecisions to meet new eventualities, and-above allmobility.Let's go! Up you get! Mobility!TRI N C U LO : But my feet are bleeding!SEBASTIAN: Get up or I'll knock you down! ( Trinculo beginsto 1JJalk again) But tell me, my good savage, this usurperof yours seems very well protected. It might be dangerousto attack him!CALIBAN : You mustn't underestimate him. You mustn'toverestimate him, either .. . he's showing his power,but he's doing it mostly to impress us.SEBASTIAN: No matter. Trinculo, we must take precautions.Axiom: never underestimate the enemy. Here, pass methat bottle. I can always use it as a club.( Highly colo red clothing is seen, hanging fi'om a rope.)TRINCULO : Right, Stephano. On with the battle. Victorymeans loot. And there's a foretaste of it . .. look at thatfine wardrobe! Trinculo, my friend, methinks you aregoing to put on those britches ... they'll replace yourtorn trousers.SEBASTIAN: Look out, Trinculo ... one move and I'll knockyou down. As your lord and master I have the firstpick, and with those britches I'm exercising my feudalrights .. .TRINCULO: I saw them first!SEBASTIAN: The king gets first pick in every country in theworld.TRINCULO : That's tyranny, Stephano. I'm not going to letyou get away with it.( They fight. )CALIBAN : Let it alone, fool. I tell you about winning yourdignity, and you start fighting over hand-me-downs!( To himself) To think I'm stuck with these jokers! W hatan idiot I am! How could I ever have thought I couldcreate the Revolution with swollen guts and fat faces!Oh well! History won't blame me for not having beenable to win my freedom all by myselfIt's you and me, Prospero! ( Weapon in hand, hea dvances on Prospero, 1vho has just appeared)PROSPERO: Strike! Go on, strike!Strike your master, your benefactor! Don't tell meyou're going to spare him!(Caliban raises his arm, but hesitates.)Go on! You don't dare! See, you're nothing but an animal... you don't know how to kill.CALIBAN : Defend yourself! I'm not a murderer. PROSPERO: The worse for you. You've lost yourchance. Stupid as a slave! And now, enough of thisfarce. (Calling) Ariel!(Enter Ariel. )Ariel, take charge of the prisoners!(Caliban, Trinculo and Stephano are taken prisoners. )S CALIBANE 5Prospero 's cave. Miranda and Ferdinand are playing chess.M IRAN DA : Sir, I think you're cheatingFERDINAND : And what if I told you that I would not do sofor twenty kingdoms?M IRAN DA : I would not believe a word of it, but I wouldforgive you. Now, be honest ... you did cheat!FERDINAND : I'm pleased that you were able to tell.(Laughing) That makes me less worried at the thoughtthat soon you will be leaving your innocent flowerykingdom for my less-innocent world of men .MIRANDA: Oh, you know that, hitched to your star, I wouldbrave the demons of hell!( The Nobles enter. )ALONSO : My son! This marriage! The thrill of it has struckme dumb! The thrill and the joy!GONZALO: A happy ending to a most opportune shipwreck!ALONSO : A unique one, indeed, for it can legitimately bedescribed as such.GONZALO: Look at them! Isn't it wonderful! I've been toochoked up to speak, or I would have already told thesechildren all the joy my old heart feels at seeing themliving love's young dream and cherishing each other sotenderly.ALONSO (To Ferdinand and Miranda) : My children, give meyour hands. May the Lord bless you.GONZALO: Amen! Amen !(Enter Prospero. )PROSPERO: Thank you, gentlemen, for having agreed to joinin this little family party. Your presence has brought uscomfort and joy. However, you must now think of gettingsome rest. Tomorrow morning, you will recoveryour vessels-they are undamaged-and your men,who I can guarantee are safe, hale and hearty. I shallreturn with you to Europe, and I can promise you-Ishould say: promise us-a rapid sail and propitiouswinds.GONZALO: God be praised! We are delighted . .. delightedand overcome! What a happy, what a memorable day!With one voyage Antonio has found a brother, hisbrother has found a dukedom, his daughter has founda husband. Alonso has regained his son and gained adaughter. And what else? . .. Anyway, I am the onlyone whose emotion prevents him from knowing whathe's saying . . .PROSPERO: The proof of that, my fine Gonzalo, is that youare forgetting someone: Ariel, my loyal servant. (Turning to Ariel) Yes, Ariel, today you will be free.Go, my sweet. I hope you will not be bored.ARIEL: Bored! I fear that the days will seem all too short!There, where the Cecropia gloves its impatienthands withsilver,where the ferns free the stubborn black stumpsfrom their scored bodies with a green cry-There where the intoxicating berry ripens at the visitof the wild ring-dovethrough the throat of that musical birdI shall let fallone by one,each more pleasing than the lastfour notes so sweet that the lastwill give rise to a yearningin the heart of the most forgetful slavesyearning for freedom!PROSPERO: Come, come. All the same, you are not going toset my world on fire with your music, I trust!ARIEL(With intoxication) :Or on some stony planeperched on an agave stalkI shall be the thrush that launchesits mocking cryto the benighted field-hand,"Dig, nigger! Dig, nigger! "and the lightened agave willstraighten from my flight,a solemn flag.PROSPERO: That is a very unsettling agenda! Go! Scram!Before I change my mind!(Enter Stephano, Trinculo, Caliban. )G ONZALO : Sire, here are your people.PROSPERO: Oh no, not all of them! Some are yours.ALONSO : True. There's that fool Trinculo and that unspeakableStephano.SEBASTIAN: The very ones, sire, in person. We throw ourselvesat your merciful feet.A LONSO : What became of you?SEBASTIAN: Sire, we were walking through the forest-no, itwas in the fields-when we saw some perfectlyrespectable clothing blowing in the wind. We thought itonly right to collect them and we were returning themto their rightful owner when a frightful adventure befellus . . .TRINCULO : Yes, we were mistaken for thieves and treatedaccordingly.SEBASTIAN: Yes, sire, it is the most dreadful thing that couldhappen to an honest man: victims of a judicial error, amiscarriage of justice!PROSPERO: Enough! Today is a day to be benevolent, and itwill do no good to try and talk sense to you in the stateyou're in . . .L eave us. Go sleep it off, drunkards.W eraise sail tomorrow.T R INCULO : Raise sail! But that's what we do all the time,sire, Stephano and I . .. at least, we raise our glasses,from dawn till dusk till dawn. The hard part is puttingthem down, landing, as you might say.PROSPERO: Scoundrels! If only life could bring you to thesafe harbors of Temperance and Sobriety! ALON SO (Indicating Caliban) : That is the strangest creatureI've ever seen!PROSPERO: And the most devilish too!GON ZALO : What's that? Devilish! You've reprimanded him,preached at him, you've ordered and made him obeyand you say he is still indomitable!PROSPERO: Honest Gonzalo, it is as I have said.GON ZALO : Well-and forgive me, counselor, if I give counsel-on the basis of my long experience the only thingleft is exorcism. "Begone, unclean spirit, in the name ofthe Father, of the Son and of the Holy Ghost." That'sall there is to it!(Caliban bursts out laughing. )You were absolutely right! And more so than youthought .. . He's not j ust a rebel, he's a real toughcustomer! (To Caliban) So much the worse for you, myfriend. I have tried to save you. I give up. I leave you tothe secular arm!PROSPERO: Come here, Caliban. Have you got anything tosay in your own defense? Take advantage of my goodhumor. I'm in a forgiving mood today.CALIBAN : I'm not interested in defending myself. My onlyregret is that I've failed.PROSPERO: What were you hoping for?CALIBAN : To get back my island and regain my freedom.PROSPERO: And what would you do all alone here on thisisland, haunted by the devil, tempest tossed?CALIBAN : First of all, I'd get rid of you! I'd spit you out, allyour works and pomps! Your "white" magic!PROSPERO: That's a fairly negative program ...CALIBAN: Yo u don't understand it . .. I say I'm going to spityou out, and that's very positive ...PROSPERO: Well, the world is really upside down ... We'veseen everything now: Caliban as a dialectician!However, in spite of everything I'm fond of you,Caliban. Come, let's make peace. We've lived togetherfor ten years and worked side by side! Ten years countfor something after all! We've ended up by becomingcompatriots!CALIBAN: You know very well that I'm not interested inpeace. I'm interested in being free! Free, you hear?PROSPERO: It's odd ... no matter what you do, you won'tsucceed in making me believe that I'm a tyrant!CALIBAN: Understand what I say, PROSPERO:For years I bowed my headfor years I took it, all of ityourinsults, your ingratitude ...and worst of all, more degrading than all the rest,your condescension.But now, it's over!Over, do you hear?Of course, at the momentyou're still stronger than I am.But I don't give a damn for your poweror for your dogs or your police or your inventions!And do you know why?It's because I know I'll get you.I'll impale you! And on a stake that you'vesharpened yourself !You'll have impaled yourself !PROSPERO:you're an old hand at deception. And you lied to me so much,about the world, about myself,that you ended up by imposing on mean image of myself: '.underdeveloped, in your words, undercompetentthat's how you made me see myself!And I hate that image . .. and it's false!But now I know you, you old cancer,And I also know myself!And I know that one daymy bare fist, just that,will be enough to crush your world!The old world is crumbling down!Isn't it true? Just look!It even bores you to death.And by the way ... you have a chance to get it overwith:you can pick up and leave.You can go back to Europe.But the hell you will!I'm sure you won't leave.You make me laugh with your "mission" !Your "vocation"!Your vocation is to hassle me.And that's why you'll stay,just like those guys who founded the coloniesand who now can't live anywhere else.You're just an old addict, that's what you are!PROSPERO: Poor Caliban! You know that you're headedtowards your own ruin. You're sliding towards suicide!You know I will be the stronger, and stronger all thetime. I pity you!CALIBAN: And I hate you!PROSPERO: Beware! My generosity has its limits.CALIBAN (Shouting) :Shango marches with strengthalong his path, the sky!Shango is a fire-bearer,his steps shake the heavensand the earthShango, Shango, ho!PROSPERO:I have uprooted the oak and raised the sea,I have caused the mountain to trembleand have bared my chest to adversity.With Jove I have traded thunderbolt for thunderbolt.Better yet-from a brutish monster I have mademan!But ah! To have failed to find the path to man'sheart . ..if that be where man is.( To Caliban : )Well, I hate you as well!For it is you who have made medoubt myself for the first time.(To the Nobles: )... My friends, come near. We must say farewell ... Ishall not be going with you. My fate is here: I shall notrun from it.ANTONIO: What, sire?PROSPERO:I am not in any ordinary sense a master,as this savage thinks,but rather the conductor of a boundless score:this isle,summoning voices, I alone,and mingling them at my pleasure,arranging out of confusionone intelligible line.Without me, who would be able to draw music from allthat?This isle is mute without me.My duty, thus, is here,and here I shall stay.GONZALO: Oh day full rich in miracles!PROSPERO: Do not be distressed. Antonio, be you the lieutenantof my goods and make use of them as procuratoruntil that time when Ferdinand and Miranda maytake effective possession of them, joining them withthe Kingdom of Naples. Nothing of that which hasbeen set for them must be postponed: let their marriagebe celebrated at Naples with all royal splendor. HonestGonzalo, I place my trust in your word. You shall standas father to our princess at this ceremony.GONZALO: Count on me, sire.PROSPERO: Gentlemen, farewell.( Exit all but Prospero and Caliban.)And now, Caliban, it's you and me!What I have to tell you will be brief:ten times, a hundred times, I've tried to save you,above all from yourself.But you have always answered me with wrathand venom,like the opossum that pulls itself up by its own tailthe better to bite the hand that tears it from thedarkness.Well, my boy, I shall set aside my indulgent natureAnd henceforth I will answer your violencewith violence!(Time passes, symbolized by the curtain 's being loweredhalfway and reraised. In semi-darkness Prospero appears,aged and weary. His gestures are jerky and automatic, hisspeech weak, toneless, trite. )Odd, but for some time now we seem to be overrunwith opossums. They're everywhere. Peccarys, wildboar, all this unclean nature! But mainly opossums.Those eyes! The vile grins they have! It's as though thejungle was laying siege to the cave . . . But I shall standfirm . . . I shall not let my work perish! (Shouting)I shall protect civilization! (He fires in all directions)They're done for! Now, this way I'll be able to havesome peace and quiet for a while. But it's cold. Oddhow the climate's changed. Cold on this island .. .Have to think about making a fire . . . Well, Caliban,old fellow, it's just us two now, here on the island .. .only you and me. You and me. You-me ... me-you!What in the hell is he up to? (Shouting) Caliban!(In the distance, above the sound of the surf and the chirpingof birds, we hear snatches of Caliban 's song:)CALIBAN: FREEDOM HI-DAY! FREEDOM HI-DAYEND OF PLAY_