
---------------------------Ophelia-----------------------------------
Do you doubt that?
No more but so?
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep,
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven;
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,
And recks not his own rede.
'Tis in my memory locked,
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Of his affection to me.
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
In honourable fashion.
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
I shall obey, my lord.

O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced;
No hat upon his head; his stockings fouled,
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ancle;
Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other;
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosed out of hell
To speak of horrors, he comes before me.
My lord, I do not know;
But truly, I do fear it.
He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
Then goes he to the length of all his arm;
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so;
At last, a little shaking of mine arm
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being: that done, he lets me go:
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes;
For out a' doors he went without their helps,
And, to the last, bended their light on me.
No, my good lord, but, as you did command,
I did repel his letters and denied
His access to me.
Madam, I wish it may.

Good my lord,
How does your honour for this many a day?
My lord, I have remembrances of yours,
That I have longed long to redeliver;
I pray you, now receive them.
My honoured lord, you know right well you did;
And, with them, words of so sweet breath composed
As made these things more rich: their perfume lost,
Take these again; for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword;
The expectation and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
The observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his music vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me,
To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?
Say you? nay, pray you, mark.

O ho!
Pray you, mark.
